Climate change anxiety
Greta Thunberg: This is all wrong. I shouldn't be up here. I should be back in school on the other side of the ocean. Yet you all come to us young people for hope. How dare you!
Lynne Malcolm: Who could forget young Swedish activist Greta Thunberg's impassioned plea for the world to take urgent action against a climate crisis. Hi, it's All in the Mind on RN, I'm Lynne Malcolm, and today we face the anxiety and grief many people are feeling about the future of the planet.
Greta Thunberg: You have stolen my dreams and my childhood with your empty words. And yet I'm one of the lucky ones. People are suffering. People are dying. Entire ecosystems are collapsing. We are in the beginning of a mass extinction, and all you can talk about is money and fairy tales of eternal economic growth. How dare you!
Lynne Malcolm: In August 2018, 15-year-old Greta Thunberg began a School Strike for Climate. Since then the movement has spread across the world. Young people are expressing their anxieties about the impact of climate change, today and in their future.
Tess Harkin: I'm Tess, I'm 17, and I'm a student, I've just finished year 11 and I live 25 kilometres south of Hobart in Tasmania.
Lynne Malcolm: To what extent do you think about all worry about the impacts of climate change?
Tess Harkin: To quite a large extent, I'd say, and my friends and I talk about that a lot. We are often thinking about it, and that is generally worry because not much is being done. And we know that we still have time to do things to stop these impacts of climate change but I guess we are worried because we are not seeing that change happening.
Lynne Malcolm: We hear about eco-anxiety, would you call what you or your friends experience as some sort of anxiety like that around climate change?
Tess Harkin: I think sometimes it's what I'd call anxiety. For example, around election time or things like that, then it's maybe more acute. But I think it's just an everyday worry, and thinking about the issue, but it is very present.
Lynne Malcolm: And how does this influence the way you live and how you're going to live your life in the future?
Tess Harkin: It's something that I have to think about when I think about where I'll go to university or where I'll live or if I'll have children. I don't know that I can really justify, if nothing changes, bringing in more people into a world that's overburdened with how we are currently living. But also if I'm already seeing the impacts and if my friends are already seeing the impacts of climate change, I don't want to think about what my kids will be seeing, what their kids will be seeing, and it has impacted how I live. Now I'm a vegetarian, mainly for environmental reasons. I have recently joined the School Strike for Climate movement and become more of an activist, and I think that's because of that worry, that something needs to be done and if the government is not doing it then someone needs to, and I think that has been put onto us students who are worried.
Patrick Rudd: I'm Patrick Rudd and I'm 15 years old. I'm a school student at Hastings Secondary College, Port Macquarie campus, in Port Macquarie, which is a beautiful town on the mid-north coast of New South Wales.
Lynne Malcolm: Patrick, what affects of climate change have you seen around you?
Patrick Rudd: Well, really recently it's been pretty crazy. We've had the bushfires, we had about five major fires surrounding Port Macquarie, and the effect on houses, the effect on wildlife, like koalas, and even the minor effects on people like me, the past two weeks have just been filled with days that I couldn't go to school because of the fire danger, or mostly because of the amount of smoke in the air.
Lynne Malcolm: And do you feel that those fires are a result of climate change?
Patrick Rudd: You can't attribute any one event to climate change because there are a lot of factors that go into this. The thing is that I think the scientists are telling us and the firefighters are even telling us, it is making the fire seasons worse, it's making them start earlier, and it's making them intensify.
Lynne Malcolm: How much do you worry about climate change?
Patrick Rudd: I do worry about it a lot but I think I'm naturally an optimistic person, and so I try to channel that fear, the constant thought on your mind that…some of the dates that are set on the IPCC report such as 2030, I'm going to be 26 then, that's when I'm going to wanting to start my life and suddenly I've got to think about all these impacts of climate change. As a young person it does feel like your future is being taken from you. So it's definitely on my mind, but I think I tend to channel it into productive action.
Lynne Malcolm: Patrick Rudd and Tess Harkin both belong to the School Strike for Climate movement.
Carol Ride: Young people are extremely vulnerable because they fear what the future is going to be like for themselves, and they are also at a very critical stage of their psychological development, and to be impacted by such bad news and anxiety and depression as their brains are forming is very concerning. So we know, for example, that young people are deciding not to have children, and that's because of their deep concern about the future and it not being secure for themselves and any children they might have. So it does require a lot from us to respond appropriately and not to dismiss their concerns.
Lynne Malcolm: Carol Ride is a psychologist and one of the founders of the not for profit organisation, Psychology for a Safe Climate. It was set up in 2010 to help people understand why climate change was so difficult to engage with. She explains how the threat and reality of the effects of climate change impact on our wellbeing.
Carol Ride: I think we have various degrees of denial as a way of protecting ourselves from the impact, and some people, their response will be to shut down engagement and deny that it's a problem at all, or deny that even though climate change is occurring there's nothing we humans can do about it because we are not implicated in the problem. And then there are other people who do understand that this is a problem and engage with it intensely, and engage to the extent of trying to urge action by government and policymakers and take action to try and engage the wider community. And those people are affected by reading the climate science, increasingly becoming alarmed about what the science is saying, and increasingly feeling quite depressed about the inaction globally and in this country around climate change. So it affects them psychologically, they can feel anxious or depressed, preoccupied. And one of our concerns was that people would feel so impacted that they might shut down from engaging in the issue, even though they have been very active.
Lynne Malcolm: If we could talk about the threat of climate change from a psychological perspective and what is the typical reaction from human beings against a threat like this?
Carol Ride: If we are open to it we can feel very alarmed and very frightened and very anxious about the future not feeling secure in the way that we had anticipated that it would and feel very worried then about those that we are responsible for, children and grandchildren and the younger generation. And so it's a combination of anxiety, fear, concern and then it also can result in people feeling deep grief about the inevitable impact on those future generations and grief about the ecological losses that are already occurring and the ones that are impending ones. So grief is a very complicated emotion because it's got many faces. We know that it begins with people in disbelief and shock and also anger and despair.
Lynne Malcolm: And the other concept that we are hearing about is eco-anxiety. How would you define that?
Carol Ride: Eco-anxiety has been described by the American Psychological Society as a chronic fear of environmental doom, and of course that is linked with grief as well, eco-anxiety, because they are part and parcel of the same sort of feeling because one doesn't feel grief unless one feels that there is some fear of something that's going to be lost and feeling devastated about that loss.
Lynne Malcolm: And you mentioned that another response is denial. Many people are severely affected by this anxiety and this grief, but others are inclined to deny it or to bury their head in the sand.
Carol Ride: Well, if we just think about bad news around one's health, that we know that people can bury their heads in the sand when they hear, say, that there is a link between smoking and lung cancer, we know some people will shut down from that, avoid hearing any more news about that and bury themselves in the same activity as they've been engaged in. It's a normal psychological response to protect oneself from bad news, unless one feels that there are resources to engage with the problem within oneself or resources in the wider community or in the political space.
Lynne Malcolm: So to what extent do you think that this concern about climate change is driving the development of mental health problems as time goes on?
Carol Ride: Well, there's certainly evidence that people who been affected by severe weather events such as in the US extreme cyclones like Sandy and Katrina, that there has been severe post-traumatic stress disorders after those events. We know that in Australia that was so also after the floods in Queensland. So, severe weather events do impact psychologically and can leave people with trauma impacts that are very hard to recover from unless they receive the help they need.
But even people who are not involved in those severe weather events, who are observers of it and follow both the climate science and the evidence unfolding before us, can be impacted emotionally and feel quite deep despair and anxiety that can then linger and affect their capacity to function normally. We know some people need some psychological help with that anxiety and depression. Other people will benefit a great deal by being able to join with others and talk about how they're feeling and discover that they are not alone and that other people are coping and that will give them some sense of resilience to keep going themselves.
Lynne Malcolm: Carol Ride from Psychology for a Safe Climate. You're with All in the Mind on RN, I'm Lynne Malcolm.
There's more and more scientific evidence that climate change is having a major impact on our planet. Recently more than 11,000 scientists across the world have supported a new paper which declares a climate emergency.
But what does the current research say about the impacts of climate change on mental health?
Helen Berry: There isn't an awful lot of research in that space, which is one of the issues I've been trying to address over the last 10 years, partly because in Australia we haven't funded climate change research much at all, and partly because mental health tends to be the Cinderella of health and gets left in rags in the backroom. So that is a major issue.
Lynne Malcolm: Helen Berry was the world's first Professor of Climate Change and Mental Health at Sydney University, until earlier this year. Now she's an honorary professor at Macquarie University.
Helen Berry: But what we do have is an emerging body of evidence, particularly ideas around how climate change and mental health may be linked, and an emerging body of evidence that is starting to show some of the pathways there, the relationship between the two is very complex, so there won't be a single study that can show this. There's more need for a very large number of studies which can come together to show it overall.
Lynne Malcolm: What are the human emotions that climate change evokes in us which can lead to mental health impacts?
Helen Berry: There's good evidence and there has been for many years now that people not just in Australia but all around the world are worried about climate change. There is some confusion about what 'worried' means, and it gets confounded with mental health problems, and the two are not the same thing. We all worry about things and we're absolutely right to be worrying about climate change, it's a huge threat. But there is no evidence as yet that worrying about climate change and being concerned about it is actually leading to the development of mental health problems that are not already present.
So those who have mental health problems already, especially around anxiety, may be very worried about climate change to the point where they are seriously anxious about it, but that may be just another facet of the anxiety they already have. So at the moment there are some stories emerging from occasional clinical settings that show that there may be something that is climate change anxiety in its own right, but there aren't any major studies that have shown that yet, though there are plenty that show that we are worried and that those who have mental health problems tend to be a bit more worried than others.
Lynne Malcolm: Are there different materialisations of climate change that cause different types of emotions and different types of mental health threats?
Helen Berry: I think that's a really good question. So the most obvious way in which we are all experiencing climate change now is in the increasing number and seriousness and frequency and duration of weather-related disasters, and I'm thinking at the moment of course of all the bushfires raging across Queensland and northern New South Wales and of course we've had them in all different parts of the country already this year. And we have floods and we have droughts, and at the moment we are in the middle of the longest drought on record and so on. So those are the implications of climate change that are most obvious to people, and those most certainly do have direct effects on mental health. And they tend to differ a little bit depending on the nature of the weather-related disaster. So in the face of chronic, sudden, violent weather events like storms and cyclones and fires, people tend to be more likely to develop what we call anxiety disorders, that's where people get so frightened and so worried that they go to the point where they can't control that worrying and it starts to control their lives and how they think and feel and behave.
In the case of other kinds of weather-related disasters, the obvious one at the moment is drought, but others such as increasing drying and salination and sealevel rise and these things that happen slowly, they seem to be more strongly related to what we call mood disorders, which is about feeling bad, particularly about feeling sad and depressed and so on. So it seems to be the different kinds of weather disasters are related to different kinds of mental health impacts.
Lynne Malcolm: And also I think you've done some work on the impact of heat and heatwaves. How does that affect us?
Helen Berry: Heatwaves are called the silent killer in my world of epidemiology. Heatwaves kill far more people around the world every year than every other kind of natural disaster added together by far. What my own work has found looking at the whole population is that hot days are mostly associated with increases in psychological distress and anxiety and depression, and reductions also in our feelings of well-being and being satisfied and happy with our lives. A couple of hot days has about the same effect on our mental health in general as being unemployed does, and we've long known for many decades what a terrible effect on mental health unemployment has. So the effect of heat happens in many different ways and it seems to affect us all quite badly.
Lynne Malcolm: Professor Helen Berry. Mental health is very strongly affected by who we are and where we live, particularly those who are already living with disadvantage or living in remote parts of Australia, and of course those who are confronted everyday by the impacts of climate change.
Helen Berry: And it isn't just our farmers and our farming communities and all the small businesses that depend on them. All our Indigenous brothers and sisters who have tried to care for the land for so long and who've struggled to do so in the last 200 years or so particularly, they are greatly impacted by climate change and their mental health and well-being and social and emotional functioning is affected as a result.
Lynne Malcolm: Helen Berry.
The group Psychology for a Safe Climate offers psychological help to people who are anxious about climate change. They run grief workshops where participants can express their emotions through art and drawing.
Carol Ride: Expressing one's grief is a really healthy way to deal with grief. We know that if it can be expressed, it's much more bearable, and to have it witnessed by other people is very, very significant, and to discover that others are feeling similarly is very healthy in a psychological way and does give people a feeling of not being so alone, of not being an oddball, but actually finding that their response is quite understandable. But as well we always tie this in with some work on self-care because we know that people who are in the midst of feeling anxious and even traumatised by what they read about and see happening in the world around climate change need some tools to try and calm their body and mind.
So we do some very simple skills around breathing, around grounding. Sometimes people will use yoga or encourage people to do meditation to learn the skills of calming the body and the mind. So we find when we do these two…both the workshop around, say, grief, and one around self-care together, that people feel relief at being heard but also discover they need to be much more mindful and careful of themselves and that they need to continually focus there so that they can remain healthy.
Lynne Malcolm: And in teaching people these skills to help them better engage with the emotions and to help them manage the emotions better, how can that then feed into giving them ways to actually do something very real and material and active against the threats of climate change?
Carol Ride: Well, one of the best ways to actually help oneself when you are anxious about something is to actually get active to do something about the problem and to do it with other people. So we encourage people to join with other people, to form groups of friends or people in their community with whom they can take some action, whether it be letter writing, meeting with MPs, campaigning on all the various climate campaigns that are around, and that has been found to be extremely beneficial, and we only have to look at the example of Greta Thunberg, that young Swedish 16-year-old who was very depressed about climate change, and once she became active with her Fridays for Future, she found that the depression lifted and that she became very engaged with the action she was involved in and it helped her psychologically.
Greta Thunberg: When I first heard about the problem, I just thought everything is just so wrong and everything is so sad and why isn't anyone doing anything about this? And so then I fell into a depression, and I just thought that it was very strange that no one else was behaving in a logical way to do something, to step out of your comfort zone and to realise that, okay, we cannot continue like we have done, now we need to do something drastically. And I'm going to do everything I can to help to push in the right direction. I think I became really into the climate movement when I was 12, 13, and that's when I became like a climate activist. I thought why not try, so then I started School Striking for the Climate.
Carol Ride: And so this is true for many of the young people that are learning about climate change, and we do encourage them to take some action with others.
Lynne Malcolm: Yes, because it is very challenging for many of us to stay optimistic and maintain hope, especially when many people don't feel that the political leadership in this space is adequate to make change quickly enough. What suggestions can you make to people who are struggling to maintain a positive attitude?
Carol Ride: Well, I think the work of Joanna Macy, she is a Buddhist leader who has written a lot about the processes one goes through in terms of grief towards action, and she talks about active hope, and she says hope is really an action, that we actually engage in doing what we think needs to be done, that that actually gives us hope, and I think that that can be very encouraging to people, to do what they know needs to be done but do it with other people and talk about how you're feeling as you're doing it.
Lynne Malcolm: Carol Ride from Psychology for a Safe Climate.
How do you feel about the current leadership and the political stance in Australia?
Tess Harkin: Disappointed, angry. I think that our leaders could do a whole lot better. They know they can do something if they just care about their people I guess. I was involved in organising the last School Strike for Climate in Hobart. I'm not sure if it would have made me any less worried or anxious but it made me feel like I was doing something and standing up on the stage and looking out at 22,000 people who cared about climate action. That definitely made me think that we did have a possibility of stopping climate change or at least stopping the impact of it. I guess that's how it made me join activist movements.
Lynne Malcolm: Tess Harkin.
I think many people feel disempowered, they feel frustrated with governments and policies because they feel they can't be effective as individuals anymore.
Helen Berry: Yes, this is a really, really important point. There's a very strong sense of disempowerment at the individual level, and that's a huge risk factor for mental health actually. When we come together as a group to undertake work that is for the greater good of everybody, not just for me but for us, then what happens is there's a psychological process that occurs during that group in which people get to know each other, they get to see each other helping others, trust starts to grow, a sense of caring grows, a sense of identity, and most importantly of all a sense of belonging, that I matter in this group, I am part of this group, I can contribute, and that is both tremendously helpful for mental health but it's also tremendously effective as a way of taking action to achieve a goal that we as individuals couldn't possibly do on our own.
Lynne Malcolm: The motivation for people to come together as a group to form this social connection and social cohesion, it is a little bit unusual now, isn't it, because there has been a mentality of real individualism. How does that affect the way we feel as an individual about what's happening to our planet?
Helen Berry: I think that's a really great point and an important one that you've raised. We do live in a world where there's a bit of a cult of the individual and we've bought into that in Australia in a big way and I think it's responsible actually for a lot of disempowerment and misery, particularly for young people. And one of the benefits I can see coming out of climate change…I wouldn't want to say climate change is a good thing, it's not, it's 99% terrible, but I think there's 1% of it that's good, and that is that it might undermine that sense of 'everything is about me, it's all about me and I'm here on my own' essentially, and replace it with much more of a sense of this is all about us and we actually can work together to overcome these challenges and problems and terrible scenarios that we may have on the horizon. And in working together, we can learn to reconnect with each other in a way that people often say to me and in research that I do that they feel has been lost, that we've lost that ability to belong and to connect and care and to depend on each other. And so I think that in taking action, and particularly in taking action in really smart ways to reduce our impact on the planet and to adapt to the effect that are impact has already hard, we can really get some really wonderful magic, if you like, out of it, things that we didn't expect, things that we might have felt were lost forever might be ours again in a new and better way, to our benefit.
Lynne Malcolm: Helen Berry is an Honorary Professor at Macquarie University who researchers the impact of climate change on mental health.
And look out for the findings about climate change in the ABC's Australia Talks National Survey. It reveals that nearly all Australians want action on climate change, and the issue tops the list of problems affecting them personally. Head to the All in the Mind site for links to further information.
Thanks to the team producer Diane Dean and sound engineer Isabella Tropiano, I'm Lynne Malcolm, catch you next time.