Queen Elizabeth's Christmas message airs as British Royal family attends traditional church service
Queen Elizabeth's Christmas message airs as British Royal family attends traditional church service
Updated
Amid Brexit, Prince Philip's deteriorating health and a scandal over Prince Andrew's friendship with convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein, Queen Elizabeth II has acknowledged that both Britain and her family have endured a "bumpy" year.
Key points: The Queen said she was impressed by young people's dynamism in opposing environmental destruction
Prince Philip, 98, was hospitalized for four days for treatment of a "pre-existing condition"
The Queen gave her newest grandson, seven-month-old Archie, a special mention
The admission came in a pre-recorded Christmas message that aired as she spent Christmas Day with close family at her palatial countryside retreat.
The Queen's traditional Christmas message was broadcast throughout Britain and the Commonwealth nations on Wednesday afternoon, after the Royals attended a Christmas service at St Mary Magdalene Church near her Sandringham estate in eastern England.
"The path, of course, is not always smooth, and may at times this year have felt quite bumpy, but small steps can make a world of difference," said Britain's longest reigning monarch.
The message was recorded before her 98-year-old husband Prince Philip was hospitalised for four days for treatment of a "pre-existing condition" that was not revealed to the public.
He was able to join the rest of the family for Christmas.
This year's message was filmed in the Green Drawing Room at Windsor Castle.
The Queen wore a royal-blue cashmere dress, adorned with a sapphire-and-diamond-studded brooch first given to Queen Victoria by Prince Albert in 1840.
Framed family portraits taken in 2019 sat on her desk, together with a black-and-white photo of her father, King George VI, from 1944.
'Protecting our environment and our climate'
The Queen spoke about the sacrifices made by the World War II generation and paid tribute to Britain's armed forces and emergency services.
"Since the end of the Second World War, many charities, groups and organisations have worked to promote peace and unity around the world bringing together those who have been on opposing sides," she said.
"By being willing to put past differences behind us and move forward together, we honour the freedom and democracy once won for us at so great a cost."
Making a rare reference to climate change in her speech, the Queen said she was impressed by young people's dynamism towards fighting environmental destruction.
"The challenges many people face today may be different to those once faced by my generation," said the 93-year-old monarch, who was a teenager during World War II.
"But I have been struck by how new generations have brought a similar sense of purpose to issues such as protecting our environment and our climate."
Greta Thunberg, a 16-year-old Swedish activist, has this year inspired millions of young people to demand faster action against global warming.
Ms Thunberg, whose solo protest outside Sweden's Parliament swelled into a global movement, was named Time Magazine's Person of the Year for 2019.
The Queen's son, Prince Charles, has for decades been a vocal environmental activist, often drawing ridicule for it from Britain's tabloid newspapers.
'It made my day'
The Queen arrived for the traditional Royal church service in a chauffeur-driven maroon Bentley with Prince Charles' wife, Camilla.
It was a festive day, as the Queen was joined at the service for the first time by Prince George, 6, and Princess Charlotte, 4, the two eldest children of Prince William and his wife, Kate. They left one-year-old Prince Louis at home.
Prince Harry, his wife, Meghan, and their seven-month-old son, Archie, did not attend. They are spending the holiday in Canada with Meghan's mother, Doria Ragland.
The Royals were greeted by several hundred well-wishers who had gathered outside the church grounds.
After the service, William, Kate and their two children mingled with the crowd and exchanged Christmas greetings.
Gemma Clark gave Charlotte an inflatable pink flamingo and received a hug in return. She said the flamingo was called Felicity but that Charlotte was free to give it another name.
"It made my day," Ms Clark added. "I've never seen the Royal family, ever."
A 'bumpy' year
The Queen's comment about a "bumpy" year was seen as referring both to Britain's laborious exit from the European Union, which is now expected on January 31 after voters gave the pro-Brexit Conservative Party a comfortable majority in Parliament, and to the Royal family's personal difficulties.
Royal problems this year included Prince Andrew's retreat from public duties following a disastrous TV interview in which he defended his friendship with sex offender Jeffrey Epstein and failed to show empathy for Epstein's young female victims.
Prince Andrew skipped the Royals' traditional Christmas Day walk to church.
He was filmed walking along a path with his brother, Prince Charles, to attend an earlier 9:00am service at St Mary Magdalene Church.
The Royal family has also endured what many close observers have characterised as a rift between Princes William and Harry, the latter having said they are now on separate paths.
It has been a difficult year of adjustment for Prince Harry and Meghan.
They have complained bitterly about constant scrutiny by the media as they settle into family life with Archie, and have sought to take a break from Royal responsibilities.
Despite Harry and Meghan's absence from the Royal Christmas celebrations, the Queen gave her newest grandson a special mention.
"Two hundred years on from the birth of my great, great grandmother, Queen Victoria, Prince Philip and I have been delighted to welcome our eighth great grandchild into our family," she said.
ABC/wires
Topics: royal-and-imperial-matters, human-interest, world-politics, climate-change, united-kingdom
First posted